Okay, we're talking to Peter Howard.
I'm giving you the general... Is European bookselling different from... Let's hope in there, you know, in terms of the knowledge of the books.
What is this?
Is European bookselling different from what bookselling?
Japanese bookselling?
Well, American bookselling.
American bookselling.
You know, you see scholars, you see somebody like Perez, who knows his books.
There's a scholar, a bookseller in the middle of Berkeley who was...
as eminently qualified in the scholarship he does on the books he sells and in the scholarship he retains in his past achievements and in his study, is the equal of any bookseller in the world, Ian Jackson, so that the dispersal and location of booksellers who happen to be scholars is as arbitrary as it is individual.
If an individual bookseller is also a scholar, glory be to God.
To think that there's a better tradition of scholar bookselling in Europe than in America, I think, is a very arbitrary assumption.
I didn't say better, but I wonder if, you know, what Fred Schreiber indicated.
Fred Schreiber is a bookseller in the United States who's well known as a scholar bookseller.
Ian Jackson is a scholar bookseller who's not well known.
He's here?
Right in the middle of Berkeley.
So that, I'm very loath to the book business, antiquarian book business, although there are a number of associations of booksellers, and all of them amalgamated in concentric circles, antiquarian book business is almost entirely vested in the skills of the individual bookseller.
And summary remarks about these booksellers is best and most wisely left to
you know, an examination of the individual bookseller.
It's a very fragile function.
It almost invariably lasts only as long as he or she lasts.
And I'm loathe to make generalizations about the trade that sweep over specific information.
So you will not get me to say that the Europeans are somehow more highly committed to
And I don't think that's what I asked either.
I guess that's a general way into the conversation.
What is pleasing is that Mr. Beres has seen fit to exhibit at American book fairs an almost unprecedented step among the French, only two or three of whom, three or four of whom
have bothered to come to the United States in order to see what's going on perhaps, or to sell books, or to make themselves better known to the general public.
Well, let's have a general softball question down the middle of a point to that.
Describe the state of American bookselling.
No, I'm extremely unwilling to describe the state of American bookselling, except that it seems at the moment to be sound and ongoing, evolving.
The appeal of the profession has perhaps grown because one can measure the constancy of the membership and applications to the seminars, which purport to give some introduction to antiquarian book selling held annually in Colorado and in Florida.
Attendance at those seminars has been consistent, sound, and full, suggesting that
a steady flow of people find the Aquarian book business attractive.
None of them are black.
On the other hand, Afro-American, it's not a profession appealing to Afro-Americans as heart surgery is or any other profession, so it has its limited appeal to say the least.
It's not perceived to be a profession in which people are
invited to enter to make a programmed income and a living that is likely to be progressive and guaranteed in the way that any of the other professions in the United States, and in fact we're just tradesmen in that regard.
And our training is hardly any better than a tradesman, unless an individual applies himself and has particular skills.
In fact, the ABA membership is not significantly increasing in the exponential rate.
It loses a few, it gains a few, and remains relatively steady.
I think it's become slightly easier for members of the ABA, which is the only group I can really speak for, except for the isolated examples of individuals that I know who are not members with whom I am extremely close.
It's my experience or guess that
These booksellers have not an easier time of it, but have a sounder time of it on the basis of good hard work.
But bookselling will take individuals only as far as their own skills, learning, education, experience, and personality will allow them.
And they're not subject to generalities.
business I've always maintained is extremely difficult.
What do you feel shaped you as a bookseller?
My education.
What you could briefly describe for me.
I was determined to become a student of literature, American and English, and to teach it from early in high school.
I spent four years in college and another eight or nine years in graduate school.
I graduated from Haverford College with a double major in biblical literature and English literature, and I chased a Ph.D.
at the University of California at Berkeley, got an M.A.
after two years, and continued on toward a Ph.D., passing a few tests in German, Old English, Middle English, Latin.
I had French yet to go, and I had been advanced to candidacy.
But, in fact, I was being wooed by the Aquarian book trade in ways that were probably unique to me.
Do you care to share any of those ways that, those factors that attracted you?
Two of my colleagues in subject A, we all taught remedial English to freshmen, sophomores, and juniors.
Two of my colleagues and I were committed to building graduate students' libraries, and I swiftly found that I had already started to collect D. H. Lawrence for obscure reasons when I was in high school, right in college.
And so I had begun to frequent bookstores up and down the West Coast.
And I also found that I had a propensity to gamble in Emeryville, where local options prevailed.
I found quickly enough that my pleasure, my needs, were to find books for others.
And so I took greater joy in finding books for my two colleagues than I did for myself.
And I found a long run of the Early English Text Society, which I sold to the university for their humanities reading room.
And that was a sort of a turning point.
It was my first institutional sale.
to Dorothy Keller, who was then head of the library, and who complained bitterly that I had had the set rebound at my expense, because it would have cost them less to have the rebound themselves.
But it was my introduction to institutional sales.
You were a bookseller at this particular point.
I had gotten my resale number in 1963, which was my third year as a graduate student.
From that point on,
In retrospect, it was only a matter of time, but I wasn't certain that I knew that.
I was still going to Emeryville.
When I once made... Explain to me what Emeryville is.
Emeryville is a town where gambling is a local option and is permitted, so I was playing cards in Emeryville in the evening.
And the day I once sold...
books and made a profit equal to the profit I might conceivably have made gambling, I never went back.
So in retrospect, it was clear to me that the motivation to gamble was in part having to do with money.
It was not.
It was.
It was to do with money.
Yes.
It was money that I sought, not so much the gambling impulses.
In other words, I wasn't addicted to gambling.
I was somehow uneasy about money.
That certainly has characterized my bookselling career as well.
And in what respect?
Well, a preoccupation with feeling self-sufficient and emotionally in need of...
being successful in some small sense or in some large sense in an economic way, whether or not this is an admirable quality.
I certainly don't admire it over much, but I have some respect for it.
It certainly was a motivating factor in my career that, in fact, I became aware that I was less than intellectual.
or less suited to be an intellectual.
And, in fact, I've never regarded myself as an intellectual.
Everybody else regards you as a profound intellectual.
Well, I think they're probably wrong, and they don't know me well enough.
I'm not preoccupied with ideas, and ideas don't monopolize my head time.
Are you preoccupied with anything?
I'm preoccupied with
the emotions associated with baseball, professional baseball, and the emotions associated with beginning, forming, shaping, and continuing to direct an evolving business, such that the whole of Serendipity Books and what it represents and for whom,
and all of the myriad of relationships that are implied and real that have to do with me and with my business.
All of those complexes are what I am and what my business is, and they're also the sustaining factors in my business.
How long did you build this building?
No, I bought this building in 1986.
And what was it before?
It had been built in 17 years before that day, a single-purpose re-standing building built by immigrant Romanian oenologists.
Oenologists.
He sold wine and beer-making equipment, and I have not altered the structure of the building to an iota.
I've strengthened some portions of it, but I have respected its original structure.
At the time, it was the
Earthquake ready and proved to be so during the 1989 earthquake.
What are they about, 15 feet?
I think they're a little higher than that, 16 feet.
How many books would you say you have in here, roughly?
I'm pleased to say that I have 400,000 books, whether it's true or not.
Well, I have two or three warehouses as well, but we can get an awful lot of books in there.
I don't really know.
You have 400,000 books.
I certainly believe I have 400,000 books.
Wow.
So, tell me your philosophy of acquisition.
I mean, do you have a sense of what the 400,000 books are?
Of course, I know them all.
You know them all.
I'd like to believe that I do, yes.
How well I know them is a measure of how good a bookseller I am.
say that I know them very superficially, and often I'll admit to that.
It's not a question, the books that are usually welcomed, have you read this book, do you know what this book is, etc., etc., but I think I have a sufficient understanding of the books that I deal in.
Sometimes I sell books before they get prolated, but that's at the
behest of the buyer and when they come back I welcome them back with an open arm and that usually is not a problem.
I am a servant of the community and I have the responsibility to honor all of the opportunities that have come about because I've been in business a long time and have had strong relationships with a few people and a few libraries.
and a few booksellers.
Maintaining these relationships inevitably result in a constant flow of books or an opportunity to have books flow.
And I've always been somebody who's been willing to shoulder the responsibility of dealing with the opportunity rather than saying no.
And I've always learned to take them all rather than to take only the one.
So in fact, many of the books that are
represented here are the residue of successful sales rather than the stock from which I will make a future profit.
I also, because of the technology available to me on a good staff and good space and a sense of doing things the right way and sufficient lines of credit, I've also, I would have to say, mastered the art of selling on consignment
almost always by receiving books from friends who are unable to sell them and who trust me and who want me to sell them for them are the happiest of circumstances and also because I'm certainly representative of one of the most significant changes in the book business and that is to say joint ownership of books among two or more dealers
with large quantities of books.
Can you give me a couple of examples on that?
Well, it's simple.
Two dealers will buy a library, either because of geographical reasons or financial reasons or relational reasons, and the books then either get split or not split, depending on where the books are and who can sell what.
They get coded and they get sold or not sold.
Each of the booksellers trusts the other to honorably report the results and pay the money's due.
I'm very good at that.
I'm trusted by a large number of friends, and I trust them equally.
And this is particularly effective when the two are on separate coasts or have separate skills.
Could you give me a couple of specific examples?
Well, we bought the contents of Client Brooks' house.
Waiting for Godot Books for Annie Ness and Gary Olsen and Serendipity bought the contents of Client Brooks' house in New Haven.
This involved not only papers of Client Brooks that Beinecke didn't want,
but also old books, which he had gathered when he was a young man on Rhodes Fellowship at Oxford, and significant quantities of books of modern writers with whom he was close, Elliot and Welty and Loverpin Warren, which recorded special treatment, so that I was able to sell all the Faulkner-related material to Xavier University in New Orleans and all of the
books as copies of his own work to the University of South Carolina, while Godot, in the meantime, catalogued the Welty Collection and was in the process of cataloguing the Robert Penn Warren Collection.
And each of us, in the meantime, sells individual books as they come our way.
Similarly, when waiting for Godot was vacationing in California and I got a book call at City Lights,
Even though Godot just happened to be in the area at that time, I invited them to come with me and help me move the books.
We bought Perlinghetti's Rare Book Room.
Almost all the books remained here, but they were coded Godot 50.
He shared in the cost, and they share in the receipts so that I will be selling until I die.
Small pamphlets from that room mark $3, less discounted dealers.
Godot will get half the profit, or half the receipts.
But this happens frequently these days.
Serendipity negotiated the purchase of a portion of Carter Burden's books, 18,000 books, and took into partnership someone, another dealer who had more available cash.
He fronted his half, though the deal was over time, so he got a slight discount.
He got 50% of all receipts.
And although I outsell him five to one, we split all of the monies, and everyone is happy.
Who's that dealer?
That dealer's Anna Kappa Books, David Worship.
Is this now gone?
There was a big ad in the Biblio magazine, three pages.
The Burden Estate has offered another 18,000 books for sale, which I was an underbidder on, which went to
Two young men who are new to the book business and who are selling them in ways not known to me.
I think they've asked them to experiment a lot of money for some of these books.
Well, what they've asked is their business.
I've heard exactly what they've asked because I've spoken with one library who was interested.
Several million is what I've heard.
But it doesn't really matter what they ask.
I know roughly what they paid.
I've heard what they asked, but if they don't get what they asked, they're going to have to ask less or more.
And good luck to them.
They have the books under honorable circumstances, and getting the books in an upwardly mobile market is the secret of bookselling.
So long as one keeps one's finances in order and maintains an honorable puss in the...
face in the mirror.
Not meaning to go off on the Carter Burden thing, because that's whether or not I've written about it.
So what does the court collection now consist of?
Consists of all the books that the Burden estate has not sold.
But I mean, what's that, about 20,000, 30,000 books?
I would think it was slightly more than 30,000 books.
And 90% of the dollars that Carter spent, I think, are still at home in the
books that he's retained.
The collections that had been retained by the family are obviously those that are slightly more valued in terms both of their marketability and also their literary consequence.
But I don't personally tend to celebrate
an individual book simply because it's by a better author or a better copy or worth more money.
I don't like that aspect of bookselling as much as I like the aspect of simple service, no matter what the book does.
And one more question that will leave Carter with.
Do you think then, in view of what you just said, that his scheme was a sagacious one?
I don't think Carter had a sagacious scheme.
The notion of Carter investing books is a stupid one.
And I won't even discuss the notion of investing in books, booksellers invest in books.
Carter collected books, he had collected art, he collected glass bells, and he got some joy and gratification in collecting, and made some contributions to future understanding of this and that.
And he helped define the milieu too, didn't he?
No, he did not help him define anything.
Under any circumstances, Carter did not define anything.
But he was supportive of the book trade, and many young booksellers are better for his having cared to spend some money on books.
You mentioned at the beginning that a great deal of the satisfaction for you is in getting the books for other people.
Well, all of the satisfaction for me is in...
being part of a continuum in which books need to move from one place to another.
Many of them move through me.
And my job is to orchestrate the continuum and to do so honourably and to bring some pleasure to all parties, as much pleasure as possible, as much satisfaction.
Not necessarily as much money as possible, but a sufficiency of money in an honourable way.
and to do it with some sense of style and propriety.
Do you do much work with institutions?
I do an enormous amount of work with institutions, from appraisals on a next-day basis to selling individual books, mailing $10 small press printings to the Bancroft because they collect the local printer, to selling
large archives, when possible, to the appropriate place.
So I sell from one book to 100-box archives to institutions whenever it's appropriate.
Have you ever assisted in what they call collection development and actually defining the focus of a research archive?
Only in the minimal way that for some time we certainly chose the
modern small press poetry and fiction that the University of California and Santa Cruz acquired, but that approval plan has been defunct for some time now.
In general, the libraries, it is the responsibility of the librarians to choose what books they want, and if they make privy to me what they want, we certainly are effective in supplying it.
The most notable contribution of serendipity to any such approval
plan, not approval plan, but plan, a plan, any plan, it was that among other serendipity had want lists for American fiction 1901 to 1950 from Ohio State.
The want lists were specific, and it numbered at least 15,000 books.
And included with the want lists was the implied notion that Ohio State wanted any book that they didn't know about.
By certain authors?
By any author, any American fiction author between 1901 and 1950.
So the years were what?
The years were the parameters.
And we supplied, offered, we offered to Ohio State, we found and offered to Ohio State more than 10,000 of the 15,000 books.
On their list or in addition to?
On their list and in addition.
Over how long of a period of time?
Over a period of about four years.
Five years, six years, seven years.
So you were constantly sending?
It's a constant process.
And so the work we did became the basis for the Depository Collection in the United States of American Fiction 1901-1950.
It's still an ongoing project.
There's still many books they don't have, which they know exist.
In the meantime, the bibliography of American Fiction 1901-1925 has been published by Cambridge University Press, and it is an examination of the
books that exist between 1901 and 1925, which are American fiction, many of which, but by no means a majority, came from Serendipity.
We certainly have supplied the majority of the books from 1926 to 1950, but that bibliography has not yet been written.
So in that sense, by physically supplying the books, and actually identifying the large number of books that
had not previously been identified as appropriate, one makes a modest contribution to someone else's scholarship.
Certainly you're alert to the debate that's going on, and we see it right over here at Berkeley where less and less money is going to the acquisition of books, more and more money is going to the purchase of computer hardware, software, and the budget isn't even adjusted for inflation, so the budget since 1989 has been the same.
Do you find this a disquieting trend, or do you think that progress is progress in the electronic ways, especially since you do so much business with universities?
It's a problem that the libraries have to solve.
The booksellers cannot solve it for them.
My solution is that the library, in several ways, raises money to compensate for the
backward steps because of the double budgeting.
It's easy to say such a thing and harder to accomplish.
It's obvious that they must keep up with electronic developments, even though some may think it's less obvious.
I think it's in the aggregate absolutely obvious.
So whether or not one or two libraries chooses not to go that route as swiftly or as utterly as the rest,
The fact is that the world is going to go that route.
And so they simply have to raise and designate more money for the acquisition of books.
I don't think for a moment that the number of books or the dollar value of books that need to be acquired are going to decrease what many libraries will do, particularly if the texts of books are automatically online, as I think many of us believe
You know, vast quantities, not all, but vast quantities of books will be readable simply online.
So many libraries will make the choice not to acquire the type of book that will be available online.
I think all scholarly periodicals will be online.
I think all scholarly books published by Mercy Presses will be online.
Stanford's already done ten.
Libraries, in fact, will be spared the expense of acquiring expensive periodicals and binding them.
And in the long run, maybe there will be an advantage to the computer development of it, in the sense that the libraries will not have to buy certain kinds of books at all.
I think that's obvious.
But booksellers deal with the reality of a book in the hand, or an archive in the hand,
or a manuscript in the hand.
I'm not one for theorizing about the book trade, or about life in general, or about the future of baseball, so that I have plenty of books which I have no time to theorize about.
I have the obligation and the responsibility to make them available for sale and sell them, and the computer may, I think, obviously, if properly used,
make it slightly easier for me to sell certain kinds of books.
Does it influence the kinds of books that you're more willing to acquire?
I think not.
When one finds that one has a type of book that seems to sell over the internet, and this is all baby talk so far, then of course one tries to find the time to make sure that that book is available on the internet.
I've sold seven copies of
the Canadian magazine Pan No.
2, which is an anthology of young Canadian poets edited by Irving Leighton, at $35 each and a little more.
And I'm informed that I have another 100 copies in the warehouse, and so I will be motivated to find them in my warehouse and bring them to the store and let the person who has already bought five of them know that I have 100 more.
And this information and availability came about because of the Internet, but the profit on that transaction was not sufficient to pay my postage bill for one day, so I don't overvalue.
I simply acknowledge and recognize the potential for what certain kinds of things can happen on the Internet.
I have 5,000 books on the Internet, or six, and I have 400,000 books in stock.
I do think that
If I have 100,000 books on the Internet, which I think is easy to do, very easy to do, although I will not hire a slave simply to type them in, so I'll be the one who types them in, or since I have only a few employees and am not desirous of any more, I think I could look forward to an easier afterlife.
If I had no employees, if I had 100,000 books on the Internet,
And I've contemplated my later years frequently lately.
Some of my friends are not well.
But in fact, that is not the way serendipity grew, and it's not likely to happen in that way.
I'm likely just to drop dead from lifting one too many boxes and leave someone else to clean up the mess.
And it would be a big mess.
How old do you think?
I'm almost 60.
persuaded you to buy 130 copies of hand?
Oh, I didn't have to spend a penny for them.
All that stuff.
One of my friends, who was the best bookseller in Canada, decided that he no longer wanted to be a bookseller at all in Canada, and he moved to Russia.
And I took responsibility for his stock, originally 80-20, and subsequently 50-50 on a mutually agreeable basis.
This was another consignment.
I picked up all the books, and he moved to Russia.
And I have been representing his books ever since with great honor and some success.
And since he was a great book seller, he had a significant stock, which can do nothing but mature.
Canadian literature is not a major focus in many lives, but it has its place and role, and books often meet different needs over time.
Well, you're lucky you have the warehouse space to indulge that kind of work.
The warehouse space is fixed overhead, and
Booksellers should beware of fixed overhead.
Booksellers should never have books in a warehouse, in my opinion.
But you have three warehouses.
But I have three warehouses.
So there's no contradiction in terms there.
When acquiring books, 400,000 books, you said you know what you've got.
What kind of criteria do you apply?
I mean, what books won't you get?
What books will you get?
How do you make this decision?
I'm an opportunist.
acquire quantities of books when there's a sufficiency of books worth the effort inside the quantity of books.
I try semi-successfully to get rid of truly bad books.
I'd simply put them on the street, and they'd go away in a day or so.
You physically put them on the street?
Yes.
Santa Cruz consigns books to me on Wednesdays, and we routinely put
19 out of 20 boxes on the street, and keep the one box.
And what do you charge for them?
A book or something?
The books on the street are free.
Oh, really?
Yes.
Do you get a lot of poor people coming to get books?
Street people take the books, and impecunious students.
A school, English for Foreign Students and Computers for Foreign Students, is directly across the street, formerly the 9th grade high school in Berkeley, where my kids went to school.
But whoever walks by and is welcome to pick up whatever I put on the street.
This raises an interesting question.
I did a wonderful deal with Tilly Olson the other day.
I know Tilly.
I actually appraised her archive for a university which subsequently acquired her archive.
What a wonderful woman.
I spent three hours with her.
Tilly is a major presence in this new book, and believe me, not because of the San Francisco Public Library, but because she's Tilly Olson.
who left, who never finished high school, and who was totally a product of her reading of her books.
And possibly a victim of her reading in her books.
And possibly a victim of the reading in her books, indeed.
And she said, and she had a copy of Gentle Madness there from the San Francisco Library, as it turned out, and I opened it up, and she said, look at this, and it was all, it had been checked out, you know, maybe 25,
Really, for me, one of the most satisfying moments I've ever seen with my book, but not only that it's been read and borrowed from the library, but she said there's a purpose to my bringing this up.
She said, I love your book.
She said, but you know, what you didn't get into here is how do poor people collect books?
Do they collect books?
Can they collect books?
And I'm wondering, how would you have answered Tilly if she raised that question?
I never thought, to my, you know, I'm ashamed.
I've never thought of it before.
A poor person is a person without education, the former or earned by application of self.
And I would think it highly likely that the proportion of book collectors among poor people is very small.
I watch street people take books or talk over them
Constantly, but I think for the street people, the physical acquisition of books is a token act and will not in the end result in further education.
It may have been too late already, although I don't ever like to think that it's ever too late for anything.
People of modest means have always collected books, and invariably they are the most interesting of all book collectors and the most gratifying to serve.
No one has enough money, however, to buy all the books they want.
Hi.
Hello again.
Hello.
We're on again.
Okay.
They're not going to be settled down for a while yet.
You do what you have to do, right?
I understand.
If you don't mind my hanging around for a while?
No, no, no, no.
I've given them this warning to me, so maybe as long as necessary.
We were talking about poor people.
Right.
Actually, we had gone to the moderate income people, I think, and they are the most interesting to you.
The Antiquarian Bookstore.
It's the wrong place, I think, to ask about the book buying habits of people with no money or very, very small incomes.
Tavistock Book has just opened up a bookstore on the main drag in Hayward.
He's a member of the ABAA, and I routinely ask him how he's doing, and did he sell any books today, and do the people come in off the street in Hayward, which is a middle-class town, to say the least.
It's got plenty of naval people on it.
And the answer is that occasionally people drift in and meet and have sticker shock and walk right back out.
And on the other hand, Moe's bookstore in the middle of Berkeley on the Telegraph Avenue serves every type of human being and every level of income.
And I am absolutely certain that modestly priced books sell to folks with modest incomes.
I don't like the idea at all.
I'm very hostile to the notion of dividing discussions of books up on the basis of either how much they cost or how much money the customer might have.
I don't think that's the question I ask people.
I'm sure that people with modest incomes
are book buyers in this world, and doubtless the poorest countries in the world produce, such as India and China, produce vast quantities of books available at low prices.
So I'm really not able to discuss that kind of question with much intelligence.
It's just something Tilly threw out, and I thought of it when you mentioned that you put books out there.
It wasn't any part of my agenda at all.
I give plenty of books away, and I think many booksellers do, books which we cannot merchandise in any other way.
I give them away because the street is pleased to find them out there, and because it costs $40 to take a truckload of books to the dump.
Where they would get resorted anyway, at least in Berkeley, because there's a recycling organization in Berkeley that harvests books out of the dump, where I've gotten more than one interesting small archive.
Come on, really?
Oh, yes.
The entire manuscript archive of the California NAACP from 1910 to 1940 came from the Berkeley dump.
How did I get that?
That's a fascinating story.
the largest single correspondence between any two Japanese-American interned persons during the war.
I have more than 900 letters between two kids who met in the camps and who subsequently married.
That archive also came out of the Berkeley them.
Who contacts these people?
Well, every bookseller has his sources and his relationships with other people.
And I have mine, and I do my best to nurture them.
But is it an organized group of people who monitor what comes into the landfill?
I think all dumps and recycling entities in the United States now are monitored for items of value for the purpose of recycling.
Items of obvious value, but who judges the books?
Well, they're recycling doors and door handles.
That's pretty easy.
And there's a lot more money in doors and windows and door handles than there are in books coming out of any dump in the United States.
Books are just another entity or object or paper that gets thrown away by a household or picked up by house cleaners or the dump itself, and these materials get recycled.
It's a modest end of the book business, but books come from all areas.
I was very pleased and proud to recognize the NAACP manuscript archive, and I sold it promptly.
I sold that to the Bancroft Library at Berkeley.
When did this happen?
This is fascinating to me.
That's been some time ago.
It's six or seven years ago.
But to recap,
Somebody contacted you and said, did they know?
Well, either the children of the generator of the material or the family or the heirs or the house cleaners threw away all of the papers of the secretary of the California NAACP, and he had been, in fact, a grocer in Oakland and had meticulously kept all the records.
of the NAACP's activities in California from 1910 to 1940.
He had, in fact, been active in the Spanish Civil War as a black man as a teenager.
He had gone to University of California as a student in 1930.
What was his name, by the way?
I don't remember his name offhand.
I would like to think it was Jackson, but I don't remember.
I'll check it out.
The Bancroft Library was it?
Yes.
But he was a point man when James Weldon Johnson came to Oakland in 1919-1920, which I regard as the most significant event in the California history of the California NAACP.
And into my grocer came letters from all the local chapters all over the state asking if he might negotiate Mr. Johnson's visit to their local chapter.
So it was a documentary history of the
formation of consciousness in the Afro-American in California, and I was very moved and proud to be party to both the recognition of this archive and to its salvation and to its placement.
But it's also a routine matter.
It's routine that someone should watch over material that's been moved from one place to another and contact somebody who's capable of dealing with it.
in this case, me, and it's appropriate that the person, the dealer with whom it ends up, sees to its proper placement without, I hope, gross exploitation.
And it was clearly evident to you that this had to go to an institution and not to an individual collector.
There were many, many people who are African-Americans.
Oh, no, that's entirely wrong thinking, completely wrong thinking.
Well, that's a question.
It is true that an Afro-American organization in Oakland heard that I had it.
They were second in line.
I was unaware of their ability to buy, and nor was I familiar with them, but I, under no circumstances, would have refused to sell it to them if I hadn't sold it elsewhere first.
I normally will sell something to the first party in the door unless it's obvious to me that it belongs somewhere else.
Frequently enough, I spend a great deal of time on an archive and offer it to a place which then does not buy it.
So I have no artificial notions that sales are automatic.
Nothing is automatic in the book business.
But what is stable is the sets of relationships between me and my friends and my colleagues, my customers, and the institutions I serve.
In that, I think if I offer something to an institution, the institution will
I assume that I was reasonably certain of their interest and that my description of the material will be sufficient and organized and appropriate and professional enough and that my price will be fair.
I expect institutions to trust me
And just as I expect others to trust me, and repeated instances of trust, I think, are good for character and good for business.
Since it was a sale to a university, do you care to tell me what the purchase price was?
It was under $10,000, as I remember.
Oh, that's cool.
And then, could you briefly describe the correspondence between the two of the Japanese-Americans, since you were mentioning?
The archive again came out of the Berkeley Dump, or systems associated with the Berkeley Dump.
It was a 900-letter correspondence between a young woman in Topaz, Utah, internment camp in 1943 and 1944 and 1945, with her friend David Yamate, another Japanese-American.
He got out before she did.
They wrote each other every day.
When they both got out, they married.
He immediately joined the American Army, as did many Japanese men who were interned, being good Americans.
And they again wrote each other every day, each.
And in the end, he formed an import-export company, which I think was probably successful.
I'm not aware that they had any children.
But in any case, at the end of their lives, the archive was thrown into the dump.
This particular archive was especially moving to me.
I'm a very sentimental person, because there were 20 or 30 or so printed items in the archive.
There were kids in high school.
The high school was inside the Topaz confinement, but it mirrored high school life outside the
internment camp.
They had minimal facilities so that they had a small minecraft machine and smoke on it as a paper.
But nonetheless, they had their harvest hop and their spring dance and their movie trips and their get-to-know-each-other events.
And so in this archive are the very little dance cards and badges by which
the two lovers introduced themselves to each other from the very first day.
So I can actually chart the day they met and how many times he danced with her and given the circumstances and their desperate need to be Americans because they were good Americans.
It's a wonderful epistolary and documentary history of a moment in American history which has not got a lot of glory covering it.
I have this archive for sale for $8,500, and I have it fully catalogued.
Can I get the cataloged entry?
I'll give you a copy of the catalog.
I love the story.
There were also letters from other Japanese in other camps to these kids.
There's the document in which
the boy's father tries to get him to leave America and return to Japan, as the father did, and the boy refuses.
And he doesn't want to be classified as somebody wishing to return.
Well, I'll give you the whole archive.
That's wonderful.
You could actually write a story about that.
Well, it's a good story.
Is there a narrative?
Can you divine a narrative out of the letter?
Well, the letters are between two kids who gradually get older, but they're only 16 years old, and they're not so much philosophers of their situation as
expressing, you know, constancy and devotion to each other amidst what they take routinely as slightly out of the way circumstances.
They are certainly not whining their way through these letters.
And so when you see something like this, what's your first reaction?
My reaction is that it's physically interesting.
To me, the letters have to go through
censorship, so the letters which are mailed from Topaz to Salt Lake City go to Boston and get stamped by the censor and come back to Salt Lake City.
They're interesting to me because I believe it's the largest single correspondence extant, so I think it has a historical and physical importance.
It has an attractiveness in the sense of touch and feel.
It's extremely emotional because it indicates a
an internment in high school life mirroring an outside ideal life, which is ordinary life.
I think it's a model for... I've read John Grishow.
I've read Michael Crytan.
I'm in the middle of an interview here, if you don't mind.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Sorry, it just didn't seem like... Sorry.
I've been on 60 Minutes.
Bye.
This little archive that I got is an interesting archive.
I typed these things up at home on my little portable laptop.
It has its own integrity.
Now I have the responsibility since I split the profit with the source organization.
to which I advance some money.
I have the responsibility of placing and selling the archive.
On the other hand, it was an evening's work and a day's responsibility, and the next day has added responsibilities and opportunities and work.
When I've sold it, I will be content.
I've considered
announcing it in the two or three local Japanese newspapers, but haven't gotten around to it yet.
I love the story.
The Topaz Utah is contemplating a museum, but I think it's not yet off the ground, although they have some letterhead.
They certainly are not yet funded to buy archives.
In the end, I will sell it, but I don't at the moment know to whom it's currently on offer to a major university.
But it's an isolated and individual example of the kinds of things that I do, namely seize upon an opportunity that comes my way.
I've never before had a serious archive from an intern camp.
We all know that intern camp art is uncommon and saleable.
I've had the occasional letter, but I've certainly not had 900 and some letters from before and after.
internment from two people who met in an internment camp, plus all these little printed documents.
So I regard it as a significant and sweet little archive, but it's only one event in my life, and my life is a sequence of unending events of this nature, most of which, if I get involved in them, I
in the end, contrive to successfully complete the cycle and move the item or items on to a more appropriate place, since this is simply a conduit, not an end for anything at all.
Bookselling is strictly a service profession, and it's not a repository.
The bookseller himself is no repository.
It's only a conduit for material.
That's a very important point.
Do you have a prize?
I mean, you're a busy guy.
You have 400,000 books.
Did you ever prize and think, gee, this stuff was five seconds away from being pulped or burned or being buried?
Well, we all think that way about almost everything.
even if it's to the superficial level of a book in a fine dust jacket, that doesn't want to sustain a nick in the jacket.
So many booksellers spend a great deal of time making sure that their perfect copy of a recent or not so recent modern first edition doesn't suffer any harm or further harm.
So the degree and focus of the carrying, not to mention the quality of the carrying, is...
Indigenous to the trade.
Almost everybody in the business cares about the material that they sell or about the condition of the material they sell.
Or to put it another way, the better the bookseller, the more the caring and the less the concern about the financial rewards.
The finances in the book business are the byproduct of service.
The more obviously the finances are the goal of the bookseller, I think the more obvious it is to others.
And such booksellers automatically attract their own kind and carry on from there.
Did you do, personally, any research beyond what you saw in the 900 letters?
No, I tend not to be a great scholar or bookseller under any circumstances.
In this instance, there was a coherence to the material and a sufficiency of inherent knowledge or information given the postmarks and the places they were coming to and from.
and the documentary evidence about what the name of the high school was and what kind of business he went into subsequently.
I didn't have to go research a history of when Topaz as internment camp was formed and when it ended and what the parameters were of a Japanese internment in Western America.
So no, that was not necessary to the task.
I did not write a history of a Japanese internment.
camps from the point of view of high school students involved on the base as a result of my owning this archive.
No, but I mean it was their later lives individually for you at all.
No, I did not.
I have the feeling, the strong feeling, that they're not with us any longer.
And at least, probably, we're... Anybody can track down the lives of recently living Japanese-Americans in San Francisco or in the Bay Area if they're of a mind to.
There was no need for me to do that.
What would you like to see me do?
What do you think would be a valuable, worthwhile exercise for me to pursue?
I would like you to explore the structured life of the antiquarian bookseller from various points of view.
One was emotional life.
Two, his relationships with his colleagues, fellows, and spouses or significant others.
Three, his economic life from beginning to end.
Four, his potential for growth.
Five, his commitment to bookselling and his understanding of it.
Six, his ability to evolve as a bookseller, to change, to develop, or to grow, or to concentrate, and his inclination to do so
the relationship of a bookseller to his book space, and whether he has any desire to be an entity that functions in the community as a bookstore, or if not, why not, and what tendencies there are in the United States for antiquarian booksellers to isolate themselves from the general public in order to survive, whether that's a necessity that they do that in order to survive.
how hard they work and how readily they adapt to the technology that evolves, to what degree booksellers work with local institutions or don't work with local institutions, to what degree areas are defined by the concentric circles of influence that levels and grades of booksellers have,
so whether, you know, all the areas of our country in fact have a structured book trade, and what the effect, what the nature of an area where there is not a book trade, or a poor one, or an undeveloped one, or one which is dominated by booksellers who have not been public booksellers.
I've always felt that Chicago is a very poor book town because it has not had a lot of young booksellers for a long time.
who are open and active in the streets, they have two great booksellers who were not influential on the younger booksellers of the trade.
Maybe Nebenzoll and Hamlin Barker.
They didn't breed, I feel, a lot of younger booksellers, whereas the Bay Area bred an extraordinary number of young booksellers.
I think because the book trade was open and structured, but that's a history in itself.